the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit mitop courseware at
ocw.mit.edu a Trilogy if you will on
hashing um we did a lot of cool hashing
stuff in some sense we already have what
we want
with hashing hashing with chaining we
can do constant time expected constant
expected time I should say uh constant
as long as um yeah if we're doing insert
delete an exact search is this key in
there if so return the item otherwise
say
no and we did that with hashing with
chaining under the analysis we did was
with simple uniform hashing an
alternative is to use un hashing is not
really in this class but if if you find
this weird then this is less
weird and hashing with chaining the idea
was we had this giant Universe of all
Keyes could be actually all integers so
it's
infinite uh but then what we actually
are storing in our structure is some
finite set of n Keys here I'm labeling
them K1 through K4 and is four but in
general I mean you don't know what
they're going to be uh we have a we we
redu reduce that to a table of size M
via this hash function H stuff drawn in
red and so here I have a three-way
Collision these three keys all maap to
one and so I store a linked list of K1
K4 and
K2 they're in no particular order that's
the point of that picture uh here K3
happens to map to its own slot and the
other slots are empty so they just have
a null saying there's an empty link list
there okay total size of this structure
is uh n plus M there's M to store the
table there's n to store the sum of the
L lengths of all the list is going to be
n uh and then we said the expected chain
length uh if everything's uniform then
the probability of a particular key
going to particular slot is 1/ M and
it's if everything's nice and
independent or if you use Universal
hashing you can show that uh the total
expected chain length is n / m n
independent trials each probability one
over M of falling here and we called
that Alpha the load factor and so and we
concluded that the operation time to do
an insert delete or search was order 1
plus
Alpha so that's in expectation so that
was hashing with chaining this is good
news as long as Alpha is a constant we
get constant time and just for for
collection uh today we're not really
going to be thinking too much about what
the hash function is but just remember
two of them I talked about one uh this
one we actually will use today uh where
you just take the key and take it modulo
m that's one easy way of mapping all
integers into the space 0o through n
minus one that's called the division
method multiplication method is more
fancy uh you multiply by a random
integer and then you uh look at the
middle of that multiplication and that's
where lots of copies of the key K get
mixed up together and that's sort of the
the name of hashing and that's a better
hash
function in the real
world uh so that's hashing with chaining
cool now there is it seemed like a
complete picture but there's one crucial
thing that we're missing here any
suggestions if I went to go implement
this data
structure what don't I know how to do
and one answer could be the hasch
function but we're going to ignore that
okay I know you know the answer do
anyone else know the answer yeah table
grow the table Yeah the question is what
should M
be okay we have to create a table size M
and we put our keys into it we know we'd
like M to be about the same as n but the
trouble is we don't really know n
because insertions come along and then
we might have to grow the table if n
gets really big relative to M we're
we're in trouble because this Con this
Factor will go up and it'll be no longer
constant time the other hand if we set M
to be really big uh we're also kind of
wasteful I the whole point of this
structure was to avoid having one slot
for every possible key because that was
giant we wanted to save space so we want
M to be big enough that our structure is
fast but small enough that it's not
wasteful in space and so that's the
remaining
question we want M to be Theta
n we want it to be uh Omega n so we want
it to be at least some constant times n
in order to make alpha be a constant and
we want it to be Big O of n in order to
make the space linear
and the way we're going to do this as
you suggested was to grow the
table we're going to start with m equal
to some constant pick your favorite
constant 20 20 my favorite constant
seven uh probably I want it to be a
power of two but what the hell uh
and then we're going to grow and Shrink
as
necessary this is a pretty obvious idea
the interesting part is to get it to
work and it's going to introduce a whole
new
concept uh which is
amortization thing uh so it's it's it's
going to be cool trust me at this not
only we're going to solve this problem
of how to choose M we're also going to
figure out how py p uh the python data
structure called list also known as
array is implemented so it's the same
exactly the same problem well I'll get
to that in a moment
so for example let's say that we I said
M should be Theta n let's say we want M
to be at least n at all times okay so
what happens we start with m equals 8
and so let's say we start with an
empty uh hash table an empty dictionary
and then I insert eight things and then
I go to insert the ninth thing I say oh
now m is bigger than n what should I
do so this would be like at the end of
an insertion
algorithm after I insert something I say
oh if m is greater than n then I'm
getting worried that m is getting much
bigger than n so I'd like to grow the
table okay uh let's take a little
diversion to what does grow a table
mean so uh maybe I have current size M
and I'd like to go to a new size M
Prime this would actually work if you're
growing or shrinking but M could be
bigger or smaller than M Prime what
should I do what do I need to do in
order to build a new table of this
size easy warm up yeah allocate memory
and reash yeah allocate the memory and
rehash so we have all these Keys they're
stored with some hash function in here
in table of size M I need to build an
entirely new table size M
Prime and then I need to rehash
everything
uh one way to think of this is for each
item in the old table
uh insert into the new
table T
Prime I think that's worth a
cushion we're we're you got one all
right you don't want to get hit it's
fine we're not burning through these
questions fast enough so answer more
questions okay so how much time does
this take that's the main point of this
exercise
yeah or order M yeah I think as long as
M and M Prime are Theta n this is order
n uh in general it's going to be n plus
M plus M
Prime but you're right most of the time
that's I mean in the situation we're
going to construct this will be Theta n
okay but in general uh there's this
issue that for example to iterate over
every item in the table you have to look
at every slot and so you have to pay
order M just to visit every slot order n
to visit all those lists uh M Prime just
to build the new table of size M Prime
initialize it all to
nil good uh
fine I guess another main point here is
that we have to build a new hash
function why do we need to build a new
hash function because the hash function
why do I call it fpre calling it h
Prime the hash function is all about
mapping the universe of keys to a table
of size M so if M changes we need we
definitely need a new hash function if
you use the old hash function you would
just use the beginning of the table if
you add more slots down here you're not
going to use them so for every key
you've got to rehash it figure out where
it goes okay I think I've drilled that
on enough times so the question becomes
when we see that our table is too
big how much we need to make it bigger
but how much
bigger
suggestions yeah 2x 2x twice M good
suggestion any other
suggestions
3x okay
um M Prime = 2m is the correct answer
but for fun or for pain I guess let's
think about the wrong answer which would
be just make it one bigger that'll make
m equal to n again so that seems it's at
least safe it will maintain my invariant
that m is at least N I get this wrong
sorry it's the wrong
way n is greater than M I want M to be
greater than or equal to
n all right so if we just incremented
our table size then the question becomes
what is the cost of n
insertions so say we start with an empty
table so and it has size eight or
whatever some constant and we insert n
times then after eight insertions when
we insert we have to rebuild our entire
table that takes linear time after we
insert one more we have to rebuild that
takes linear time and so the cost is
going to be something like uh after you
get to eight it's going to be 1 + 2+ 3 +
4 it's a triangular number every time we
insert we have to rebuild
everything okay so this is quadratic
this is
bad fortunately if all we do is double M
we're golden and this is sort of the
point
of why it's called table I call it table
resizing there in order to not give it
away but this is a technique called t
doubling okay let's just think of the
cost of n
insertions there's also deletions but if
we just again start with an empty table
and we repeatedly insert then the cost
we
get
uh if we double each time and we're
inserting after we get to eight we
insert we double to 16 then we insert
eight more times then we double to 32
then we insert 16 times then we double
to 64 all these numbers are roughly the
same they're within a factor of two of
each other every time we're rebuilding
in linear time but we're only doing it
like log n
times right if we're going from from one
to n they're log n growths log n
doublings that we're able to do so you
might think oh it's uh n log n but we
don't want n logn that would be binary
search trees we want to do better than n
log n if you think about the costs here
the cost to rebuild the first time is
constant it's like eight and then the
cost to rebuild the second time is 16 so
twice that the cost to build the next
time is
64 so these go up
geometrically I me you've got to get
from one to n with log n steps the
natural way to do is by doubling and you
can prove that indeed this is the case
so this is a geometric series mean to
cross it out there and so this is Theta
n
okay now it's a little strange to be
talking about Theta n this is a data
structure supposed to be constant time
per operation this data structure is not
constant time per operation okay even
ignoring all the hashing business all
you're trying to do is grow a table it
takes more than constant time for some
operations near the end when you have to
rebuild the last time you're
restructuring the entire table that
takes linear time for one
operation it's that you might say that's
bad but the comforting thing is that
there are only a few operations log n of
them that are really expensive the rest
are all constant time you don't do
anything you just add into the table so
this is an idea we call
amortization maybe I should write here
we call this table doubling
okay so the idea with amortization let
me give you a definition
um let's say
actually I'm gonna be a little bit bag
here and just say uh want T van let me
see what I say in my
notes yeah I'm going to say to you man
so uh we're going to use a concept of
usually we say the running time is T of
N and we started saying the expected
running time is some T of n 1 plus Alpha
whatever uh now we're going to be able
to say the amortized running time is T
ofn or the running time is T ofn
amortised
that's what this is saying and what that
means is that uh it's not any statement
about the individual running time of the
operations it's saying if you do a whole
bunch of operations K of them then the
total running time is at most K * T ofn
this is a way to amorti or to yeah
amortize this is in the in the economic
sense of amortize I guess you spread out
the high costs so that it's cheap on
average all the time this kind of like
normally we pay rent every month but you
could think of it instead as you're only
paying $50 a day or something for your
monthly rent okay it's uh
maybe you know if you if you really if
you want to smooth things out that would
be a nice way to think about paying your
rent or every second you're paying I
don't know a penny or something um
that's that's close actually a little
bit off Factor too um anyway so uh
that's the idea so you can think
of this is kind of like saying that the
running time of an operation is T of n
on average but it's put that in quotes
we don't usually use that
terminology um so maybe you can put a
Tilda here
uh where the average
is taken over all the
operations so this is something that
only makes sense for data structures
data structures are things that have
lots of operations on them over time and
if you just instead of counting
individual operation times and then
adding them up if you add them up and
then divide by the number of operations
that's your amortized running time so
the point is in table
doubling the amortized running time
is Theta
1 because it's n in total well at this
point we've only analyzed insertions
haven't talked about deletions
but so K
inserts if we're just doing insertions
take Theta K
time and total so this means uh constant
amortised per
insert okay it's a simple idea but a
useful one because typically unless
you're in like a real-time system you
typically only care about the overall
running time of your algorithm which
might use a data structure as as a sub
routine you don't care if individual
operations are expensive as long as all
the operations together are
cheap if you're using hashing to solve
some other problem like counting
duplicate words in
Doc you just care about the running time
of counting duplicate words you don't
care about how long each step of the for
Loop takes just the
aggregate so this is good most of the
time and we've proved it for insertions
it's also true
um when you have
deletions you K inserts and
deletes uh they certainly take order K
time actually this is easy to prove at
this point because we haven't change
delete so what delete does is it just
deletes something from the table leaves
the table the same
size
uh and so it actually makes life better
for us because if it decreases is m in
order to make M big again you have to do
more insertions than you had to before
and the only extra cost we're thinking
about here is the the growing the
rebuild cost from inserting too big and
so this is still true deletions only
help us if you have K total inserts and
deletes then uh still be order K so we
still get constant
advertised
but this is not totally satisfying
because the table might get big again M
might become much larger than n for
example suppose I do n inserts and then
I do n deletes so now I have an empty
table n equals z but m is going to be
around the original value of n or the
maximum value of n over
time
so we can fix
that suggestions on how to fix that
this is a little more subtle there's two
obvious answers one is correct and the
other is
incorrect
yeah good so option one is if the
table becomes half the size then
shrink to have
size
sure okay that's on the right track
anyone see a problem with that yeah
you're like resizing when you're going
from like 8 to 9 you can go from 8 to 9
9 or so good so if you're resizing and
say you're you're have a table of size
or you have you have eight items in your
table you you add a ninth item and so
you double to
16 then you delete that ninth item
you're back to eight and then you say oh
now m equals n/2 so I'm going to shrink
to half the size and if I insert again
delete insert delete insert I spend
linear time for every operation so
that's
problem uh this is
slow uh if we go from 2 to the K to 2
the k + 1 we go this way I insert sorry
2 the k + one then I said it right
insert to go to the right delete to go
to the left then we'll get linear time
prop
operation that is bad so how do we fix
this
yeah M N3
good I'm going to do four if you don't
mind I'll keep it powers of two any
number bigger than three will work any
number bigger than two will work
here but it's kind of nice to stick to
powers of two um just for fun I mean it
doesn't really matter because as you say
we're still going to shrink to half the
size but we're only going to trigger it
when we're 3/4 empty so we're only using
a quarter the space then it turns out
you can afford to shrink to half the
size because in order to explode again
in order to need to grow again you'd
have to still insert n over uh
M M over two items you because it's half
empty so when you're only a quarter full
you shrink to become a half full because
then to grow again requires a lot of
insertions I haven't proved anything
here but it turns out if you do this uh
the amortise time
becomes
constant for K insertions and deletions
arbitrary
combination you'll maintain linear size
because of these two because you're
maintaining the invariant that m is
between
um
n got to get it right n and
4N you maintain that invariant that's
easy to check so you always have linear
size
and the advertised running time becomes
constant uh we don't really have time to
prove that in in the class it's a little
bit tricky uh read the textbook if you
want to know know
it table doubling
questions all
right full ring no it's it's cool
because not only can we solve the
hashing problem of how do we set m in
order to keep Alpha a constant we can
also solve python list python lists or
also known as resizable
arrays you may have wondered how they
work because they offer Random Access we
can go to the C the I item in constant
time and modify it or get the value we
can add a new item at the end in
constant time that's uh append list.
append and we can delete the last item
in constant time that's
one version is list.pop it's also delete
list Square braet minus one uh you may
you should know that deleting the first
item is not constant time that takes
linear time because what it does is it
copies all the values over lists python
lists are implemented by arrays but how
do you support this Dynamic where you
can increase the length and decrease the
length and still keep linear space well
you do table doubling and I don't know
whether python uses two or some other
constant but any constant will do as
long as the deletion constant is smaller
than the insertion
constant uh and and that's how they work
so in fact list. a pen and list. pop are
constant
amortized before we just said for
Simplicity they're constant time and for
the most part you can just think of them
as constant time but in reality they're
constant amortized now for fun just in
case you're curious you can do all of
this stuff in constant worst case time
per operation Maybe fun
exercise uh do you want to know
how yeah uh the rough idea is when you
realize that you're going to get that
you're getting kind of full you start
building on the side a new table of
twice the size and every time you insert
into the actual table you move like five
of the items over to the new table or
some con it needs to be a big enough
constant so that by the time you're full
you just switch over immediately to the
other Str
it's kind of cool uh it's very tricky to
actually get that to work but if you're
in a realtime system you might care to
know that for the most part people don't
Implement those things uh because
they're complicated but it is possible
to get rid of all these
amortis
cool let's move on to the next
topic which is more hashing
related this is sort of General data
structures in order to implement hashing
with chaining but didn't really care
about hashing per
se we assumed here that we can evaluate
the hash function in constant time that
we can do insertion in constant time but
that's the name of the game here but
otherwise we didn't really care as long
as the rebuilding was linear time this
technique
works okay uh now we're going to look
at a new
problem there's lots of practical
applications I mentioned some of these
problems in the last class uh which is
string matching this is essentially the
problem how many people have used grep
in their life okay most of you um how
many people have used find in a text
editor okay the rest of you um and so
these are the same sorts of problems you
want to search for a pattern which is
just going to be a substring in some
giant string which is your document your
file if you will so State this
formally given two
strings s and
t you want to know does s
occur as a
substring of
T so for example maybe s is a string
66 and T
is your
entire the mail that you've ever
received in your life or your inbox or
something okay so it's t is Big
typically and S is small it's what you
type usually maybe you're searching for
all email from Patza so you put the
Patza from string or whatever you're
searching for that in this giant thing
you'd like to do that
quickly okay another application s is
what you type into Google T is the
entire web that's what Google does it
searches for your string in the entire
web I'm not
joking okay uh
fine so we'd like to do that what's the
obvious way to search
for a substring in a giant
string
yeah just check each substring of the
right length so it's got to be of the
length of s and just there's only a
linear number of them so check each one
okay let's analyze
that so simple algorithm
actually just for fun I have pseudo code
for
it I have python code for it even more
cool
okay I don't know if you know all these
python features but you should they're
super cool this is uh string splicing so
uh we're looking at in t let me draw the
picture here we have S here we have t it
is a big string we'd like to compare s
like that and then we'd like to
compare s shifted over one see whether
all of the characters match there and
then shifted over one more and so on and
so we're looking at a substring of T
from position I to position I plus the
length of s not including the last one
so that's of length exactly length of s
this is s this is
T and so each of these looks like that
pattern We compare s to T what this
comparison operation does in Python is
it checks the first character see if
they're equal uh if they are keep going
until they find a mismatch if there's no
mismatch then you return true otherwise
you return
false okay and then we do this roughly
length of T times because that's how
many shifts there are except at the end
we run out of room we don't care about
if we shift beyond the right because
that's clearly not going to match and so
it's actually length of T minus length
of s that's the number of
iterations okay hopefully I got all the
index arithmetic right and there's no
plus ones or minus ones I think this is
correct okay we want to know whether any
of these match if so the answer is uh
yes s occurs in sub uh as a substring of
T of course in reality you want to know
not just do any match but show them to
me things like that but you can change
that same amount of time so what's the
running time of this
algorithm so my relevant things are the
length of s and the length of
T what's the running
time
sorry T by T multipli by S yeah
exactly technically it's length of s uh
times length of T minus
s okay but typically this is just s *
T it's always at most s * T and it's
usually the same thing because s is
usually smaller by at least a constant
Factor than
T this is kind of slow if you're
searching for a big string uh it's it's
not so great I mean certainly you need t
s plus T you've got to look at the
strings but s * T is kind of it could be
quadratic if you're searching for a
really long string and another string so
what we'd like to do today is use
hashing to get this down to linear
time so ideas how could we do
that using hashing subtle
hint yeah
UMES okay so you want to decompose your
string into words and use the fact there
are fewer words than characters you
could probably get something out of that
and old search engines used to do that
um but it's not necessary turns
out and it also depend on what your
average word length is
so we we in the end today I mean we're
not going to analyze it fully but we are
going to get an algorithm that runs in
this time
guaranteed in expectation because we're
randomized but yeah
good so the idea is to what we're
looking at is a rolling window of T
always of size s and at each time we
want to know is it the same as s now if
somehow it's expensive to check whether
a string is equal to a string there's no
way getting around that well there are
ways but there isn't a way for just
given two strings but if somehow instead
of checking the strings we could check a
hash function of the strings because
strings are big potentially we don't
know how big S is and so that's the
universe of of strings of length s is
potentially very big it's expensive to
compare things if we could just hash it
down to some reasonable size to
something that fits in a word then we
can compare whether those two words are
equal whether those two hash values are
equal whether there's a collision in the
table that would somehow that would make
things go faster we could do that in
constant time perer
operation how could we do that that's
tricky part but that is exactly the
right
idea uh
so make some space
I think
uh do things a little out of order from
what I have in my notes and tell you
about something called rolling
hashes and then we'll see how they're
used so shove that idea we're going to
come back to it we need a data structure
to help us do
this uh because if we just compute the
hash function of this thing compare it
to the hash function of this thing and
then compute the hash function of the
next the shifted value of T and compare
it we don't have to recompute the hash s
that's going to be free once you do it
once but Computing the hash function of
this and then the hash function of this
the hash function of this usually to
compute each of those hash function
would take length of s time and so we're
not saving any time somehow if we have
the hash function of this the first
substring of length s we'd like to very
quickly compute the hash function of the
next substring in constant time
yeah yeah you look at this portion s and
this portion of s they share s minus one
of the characters just one character
different first one gets deleted last
character gets added so here's what we
want we'd like given a hash value maybe
I should call this R just to it's not
the hash
function give it a rolling hash value
you might say I'd like to be able to
append a character okay I should say um
R
maintains a
string so there's some string let's call
it uh
X and this what r. aend of C does is ADD
character
C to the end of
X and then we also want an operation
which is you might call it pop left in
Python I'm going to call it
skip little shorter uh
Delete the first character of
X and
assuming it's
C so we can do this because over here
what we want to do is add this character
which is like T of length of s and we
want to delete this character from the
front which is T of zero then we will
get the next
string okay and at all times R what's
the point of this
R you can say R let's say open per close
peren this will give you a hash value of
the current
string so this is basically h of x
for some hash function H some reasonable
hash function okay if we could do this
and we could do each of these operations
in constant time then we can do string
matching let me tell you
how this is called the carp Raven string
matching
algorithm and if it's not clear exactly
what's allowed here you'll see it as we
use
it first thing I'd like to do is compute
the hash function of s I only need to do
that once so I'll do it in this data
structure the only thing you're allowed
to do is add characters initially you
have an empty string and so for each
character in s I'll just append it and
now RS gives me
a hash value of s okay
now I'd like to get started and compute
the hash function of the first s
characters of
T so this would be
t uh up to length of
s and I'm going to call this thing RT
that's my rolling hash for t
and append those characters so now RS is
a rolling hash of s RT is a rolling hash
of the first s characters in t so I
should check whether they're equal if
they're not add one charact shift over
by one add one character at the end
delete character from the beginning I'm
going to have to do this many
times so uh I guess technically I need
to check whether these are equal first
if they're equal then we'll talk about
it in a moment the main thing I need to
do is this for
Loop checks all of the
other and all I need to do is throw away
the first
letter which I know is T of IUS length
of
s and add the next letter which is going
to be T of
I and then after I do that I don't
change HS because that's fixed that's
just or sorry I switched from H to in my
notes I have H and I've been switching
to R so all those H's are
rs sorry about
that so then if
RS
equals RT
then
potentially that substring of T matches
s but it's potentially because we're
hashing things are only true in
expectation there's some probability of
failure just because the hash function
of two strings comes out equal doesn't
mean the strings themselves are equal
because there are
collisions even distinct strings May map
to the same slot in the table so what we
do in this situation is
check
whether H oh gosh s equals T I did
slightly less conveniently than before
it's like IUS length of s +
to I + 1 oh well that wasn't very
beautiful but it works
um so in this casee I'm going to check
it character by
character
okay if they're
equal then we found a
match so it's kind of okay that I spent
all this time to check them and
particular if I'm just looking for the
first match like you're searching
through a text document you just care
about the first match uh then you're
done so yeah I spent order s time to do
this but if they're equal it's sort of
worth that effort I found a
match uh if they're not
equal we basically hope or we we will
engineer it so that uh this happens with
probability at most one/
s we can do that then the expected time
here is constant
so that would be
good because then all this if these are
taking if skip and a pen take constant
time and this sort of double checking
only takes constant expected time except
when we find matches and then we're
we're okay with it then this overall
thing will take linear time okay in fact
the proper thing would be this is
uh you pay S Plus
T then you also pay for each match that
you want to
report you pay a length of
s I'm not sure whether you can get rid
of that term but in particular if you
just care about one match this is linear
time which pretty
cool uh there's one remaining question
though which is how do you build this
data structure is the algorithm clear
though I mean I've wrote it out in gory
detail so you can really see what's
happening also because you need to do it
in your problem set so I give you as
much code to work from as possible
question what is RS RS is a going to be
is going to represent a hash value of s
okay uh you could just say h of s but uh
what I'd like to show is that all you
need are these operations and so given a
data structure that will compute a hash
function given the append
operation what I did up here was just
append every letter of s into this thing
and then RS open PR Clos pren gives me
the hash function of
s said you can
do yeah so so there are two rolling
hashes one's called RS and one's called
RT okay this was a an ADT and I I didn't
say it at the begin line one I say RS
equals a new rolling hash RT equals a
new rolling hash sorry I should bind my
variables okay so I'm using two of them
because I want to compare their values
like
this other
questions it's actually a pretty big
idea this is an algorithm from the 90s
believe so it's fairly
recent and it's one of the first
examples of really using randomization
in a super cool way
other than just hashing as a data
structure all right so the remaining
thing to do is figure out how to build
this ADT what's a data structure that
implements this doing spending constant
time for each of these
operations now to tell you the truth
doing it depends on which hashing method
you use which hash function you want to
use I just erased the multiplication
method because it's a pain to use the
multiplication method
um bet you could use it actually that's
an exercise for you to think about I'm
going to use a division method because
it's the simplest hash function and it
turns out in this setting it does work
we're not going to prove uh that this is
true this is going to be true in
expectation
expected
time but carp and Raven prove that this
this running time holds even if you just
use this simple hash function of the
division method where m is chosen to be
a random
Prime let's say about as big as or let's
say at least as big as length of
s the bigger you make the higher
probability this is going to be true but
length of s will give you this in in on
average so we're not going to talk about
in this class how to find a random Prime
but the the algorithm is choose a random
number of about the right size and check
whether it's Prime if it's not do it
again and you know by prime number
theorem after log n trials you will find
a prime okay and we're not going to talk
about how to check whether a number is
prime but it can be done
all right so uh we're basically done the
point is to look at if you look at an
append
operation and you think about how this
hash function
changes it when you add a single
character oh I should tell you um we're
going to treat the string X as a
multi-digit number
this is the sort of preash
function and the base is the size of
your
alphabet so if you're using asy it's 256
if you're using some uni code it might
be larger okay but whatever the charact
the size of your characters in your
string then when I add a character this
is like taking my number shifting it
over by one and then adding a new value
so how do I shift over by one I multiply
by a so if I have some value some
current hash value
U it changes to U * a or sorry this is
the the uh number represented by the
string I multiply by a and then I add on
the character or in Python you'd write
or of the character that's the number
associated with that character
okay that gives me the new string very
easy if I want to do Skip it's slightly
more annoying but skip means just
annihilate this value and so it's like U
goes to U
minus uh the character time a the^ size
of uus one that's I have to shift over
shift this character over to that
position then annihilate it with a minus
sign you could also do
xor okay when I do this I just think
about how the hash function is changing
everything is just modul m so if I have
some hash value here r i take R * A Plus
or of c and I just do that computation
modulo M and I'll get the new Hash Hash
value do the same thing down here I'll
get the new hash value so what R stores
is the current hash value and it stores
a to the power length of U um
or length of X whatever you want to call
it so that would be a little
better and then it can do these in
constant number of operations just
compute everything modu m one
multiplication one addition you can do
aend and Skip and then you have the hash
value instantly it's just stored and
then you can make all this work